
聖人無常心       holy person without eternal heart
以百姓心為心     by-100-surnames heart act heart

They act for the hearts of the common peoples,

A holy person lacks a constant heart,
They take on the heart of the people,

善者 吾善之      good beings  I good of
不善者 吾亦善之  not good beings   I things good of
德善            virtue good

Giving people, I will give back,
Stingy people, I will also give to,

Giving people, I will give back,
Stingy people, I will also give to,

Kind people, I act kind to them,
Kind people, I show them kindess,
Honest people, I am honest with,
Not kind people, I am also kind to,
Kindess is a virtue.

Not kind people, I am also kind to,
Dishonest people, I am honest with,

信者 吾信之      honset beings  I honest of
不信者 吾亦信之    not honest beings  I things honest of
德信             virtue honest

Kind people, I show them kindness,
Trustworthy, I will trust,
Untrustworthy, I am still trusting,

People who are kind, I show kindness to,
People who are honest, I am honest with,

People who are not kind, I still show kindness to,
People who are not honest, I still am honest with.

Honesty is a virtue.
Kindness is a virtuous.

People who are kind  I show kindness to,
People who are not kind  I also show kindness to,
Kindness is a virtue.
Virtue of having kindness.
Virtue of keeping honesty.

People who are honest  I am honest with,
People who are not honest  I also am honest with.
Honesty is a virtue.

I show kindness to people who are kind.
I also show kindness to people who are not kind.
Having kindness is a virtue.

   kind people  I show kindness to,
 unkind people  I also show kindness to.
   having kindness is a virtue.

   honest people  I am honest with.
dishonest people  I also am honest with.
   keeping honesty 

people with kindess,     I show kindness to,
people without kindness, I also show kindess to.
being kind is a virtue

people with honesty, 

people without honesty,

honest
giving

Good people I am good to them.
Bad people, I am good to them also.
Virtue of giving.

Generous people I will give to.
Stingy people I also will give to.
Virtue of being generous.

Honest people I am honest with.
Dishonest people I am honest with.
Virtue of having honesty.




Honest people
               




聖人之在天下歙歙焉  holy person of with tao heaven-down inhale inhale here
為天下渾其心       act heaven-down muddy their heart

Acting on the world with muddied heart
Acting for the world muddies their heart.
People are intent on their eyes and ears,
To act on the world, muddy their heart.

By acting in the world they muddy their hearts,

Holy peoples with TAO draw breath in the world,
Acting in the world muddies their hearts.

百姓皆注其耳目    100-surnames all pour into their ears eyes
聖人皆孩之       holy person all child of

People intently use their eyes and ears,

The people intent on their eyes and ears,

The people intently use their eyes and ears,

Holy peoples with TAO draw breath in the world,
Acting in the world muddies their hearts.
The people intent on using eyes and ears,
They all are children of the holy person.
