
天長地久           (heaven long1 earth long2)
天地所以能長且久者  (heaven-earth) (place) by (ableto long1)(and)long2(beings)
以其不自生         (by keeping) not (self - produce)
故能長生           (therefore)(ableto long) (presence)


the width of heaven and age of age

The limitless heavens and eternal earth;
Heaven and Earth are where beings grow and age.
By keeping selfless
they endure forever

Heaven and Earth are everlasting
The reason Heaven and Earth can last forever
Is that they do not exist for themselves
Thus they can last forever

Heaven is long-enduring and earth continues long. 
The reason why heaven and earth are able to endure and continue thus long 
is because they do not live of, or for, themselves. 
This is how they are able to continue and endure. 

Heaven and earth endure.
They endure because they 
are not selfish or self-preserving;
Therefore, they live long.

by not holding to what they produce
they continue themselves

The vast Heavens and eternal Earth,
Heaven and Earth will grow and age.
By keeping selfless,
They endure forever.






是以聖人           (so a holy person)
後其身而身先        last (keeeping self but self) first      -- back/front?
外其身而身存        leaving (keeping self but self) living

Therefore the sages:
Place themselves last but end up in front
Are outside of themselves and yet survive

Therefore the sage 
puts his own person last, and yet it is found in the foremost place; 
he treats his person as if it were foreign to him, and yet that person is preserved.

Likewise, the Holy One 
thinks of himself last and comes first;
He disregards himself and finds himself enduring.

So a holy person,
keeping themselves last but they are first
keeping themselves empty but finding life
putting themself last but becomes first
leaving alone their body but living 

So a holy person,
puts themself last and is first
denies themself and still lives



非以其無私邪        (not by keeping) without personal evil
故能成其私         therefore ableto (succeed) keeping self

1234567890123456789012345678901
not by keeping without themself evil
therefore self keeps ableto flourish

By keeping themself from evil
their self is able to triumph. 

By keeping the self from evil
the self is kept able to grow

1234567890123456789012345678901
By keeping the self from errors
So by keeping the self from evil
the self is kept able to triumph




Is not all of this because 
he is fulfilled in his selflessness?

Is it not because he has no personal and private ends, 
that therefore such ends are realised?

Is it not due to their selflessness?
That is how they can achieve their own goals



