大國者下流      great country being down flows
天下之交       heaven down of turnover
天下之牝       heaven down of female
牝常以靜勝牡    female eternal by quiet victoryover male
以靜為下       by quiet action unders

A great country kneels and becomes like a vast river,
The collection of many waters,
The feminine within the world.

The feminine ever by stillness subdues the masculine,
Subdues with active stillness,

So a great country, by kneeling to smaller countries,
Will subdue smaller countries.

The lesser country, by kneeling to greater countries,
Will subdue greater countries.

A great state kneels becoming like a vast river,
The collection of many waters,
The feminine within the world.

The feminine in stillness subdues the masculine,
Subdues with active stillness,

So a great state, by kneeling to a lesser state,
Then subdues the lesser state.

The lesser state, by kneeling to greater states,
Can subdue the greater states.


Smaller countries, by kneeling to greater countries,
Smaller countries, by kneeling to a greater country,
And a smaller country, by kneeling to a great country.
The smaller country, by kneeling to a larger country,
The smaller country, by kneeling to a greater country
Will subdue the great country.


故大國以下小國   so great country by down small country
則取小國       then seize small country
小國以下大國    small country by down great country
則取大國       then sieze great country

故或下以取      so either unders by seize
或下而取。      either unders conj seize


Thus the one, by kneeling, annexes,
The other, by kneeling, is annexed.

The greater state wishes only to shepherd the peoples,
The smaller state wishes only to provide its services.

Both of these  able to obtain what they wish,
For the great  the proper action is to kneel.



大國不過欲兼畜人  great country-not-passing-desire sametime livestock person
小國不過欲入事人  small country-not-passing-desire enter affairs person
夫兩者各得其所欲  man two beings every obtain its place desire
大者宜為下       great beings proper action kneel



The smaller country wishes only to join and participate.

The feminine arou the world,
The feminine within the world,
The always by quietness defeasts the yang,
