
絕學無憂          end study dont worry

Cease learning, no more worries
Cut off learning and be without worry,
When we renounce learning we have no troubles. 

End study and be without worry.


唯之與阿          only of "what if..?" flattery
相去幾何          another go how-much                   geometry
善之與惡          good of "what if..?" evil
相去若何          another go as how

To flatter or to despise — what is the difference?
To praise or to resent — how are they different?

Between yea and nay - How much difference is there?
Between good and evil - How great is the distance?

Respectful response and scornful response - How much is the difference?
Goodness and evil - How much do they differ?

Of ‘yea’ and pandering, both differ by how much?
Of good and evil, both differ how then?

The (ready) 'yes,' and (flattering) 'yea;'--  Small is the difference they display. 
But mark their issues, good and ill;-- What space the gulf between shall fill?



Of true and false, how far between them?
Of good and evil, how much between them?

End study and worry no more.

Of flattery and sincerity, how far between them?
Of good and evil, what distance is between them?



人之所畏 不可不畏   people of thatwhich tofear   not can not fear
荒兮 其未央哉     desolate appearing   its notyet-over wowow!


That which people fear, you cannot be unafraid.

What all people fear, you cannot be unafraid.

Of what all people fear, you cannot be unafraid.

That which people fear, how can you be unafraid?
Of flattery and sincerity, how far between them?

End study and worry no more.

Of flattery and sincerity, how far between them?

Of good and evil, what distance is between them?


End study and worry no more.
Neglect of such has no end.

End study and worry stops.
These get endless neglect.

These are endlessly neglected
Neglect of such is endless.



眾人熙熙          great people splendid splendid
如享太牢          thus enjoy high-sacrifice
如春登臺          thus joyful ascend stage


The people are excited
As if enjoying a great feast
As if climbing up to the terrace in spring

The multitude are joyous
As if partaking of the offering
Or going up to a terrace in spring.

Crowds of people bustle about
Like enjoying excessive sacrifice,
Like ascending a springtime terrace,

Crowds of people hustle and bustle—
As if enjoying a feast or being onstage.


The people hustle and bustle,
As enjoying great sacrifices,
As springing up to the stage.


notyet over = endless

我獨泊兮其未兆    I-alone anchor appearslike notyet omen
如嬰兒之未孩      simile infant-child of notyet child


I alone am anchored, without anticipation
A not yet child that is like an infant child

I alone am anchored, apearing anticipationless
A not yet child that is like an infant child

I alone do not share the feeling—
As if uncivilized, uncultivated

I alone am anchored without anticipation,
Like an infant, not a child;

I alone am quiet and uninvolved
Like an infant not yet smiling


I alone am anchored without anticipation,
Like not yet even a child, but an infant.


I alone am anchored, without anticipation,
As one not yet a child, instead an infant.



乘乘兮若無所歸    makeuse makeuse appearslike as without thatwhich return

So weary, like having no place to return
Listless as though with no home to go back to.
Breathing out, as if without a place to go back to.
Exhausted and sad, I do not know where to return.
I look dejected and forlorn, as if I had no home to go to.

As one not yet a child, instead an infant.

Weary, weary. Like one without a place to return.

So weary, as without a place to return to.
As one not yet a child, instead an infant.


眾人皆有餘        great people all possess-surplus 
而我獨若遺        and I-alone as leftbehind

The people all have surplus
While I alone seem lacking

The multitude all have more than enough.
I alone seem to be in want

Crowds of people all have more than enough,
I alone seem left behind.

All people have more than enough;
I alone seem to have lost something


The people all have abundance,
While I alone am left in want.

All people have in abundance,
While I alone am left behind.


我愚人之心也哉    I stupid-person of heart also wowow!
沌沌兮俗人昭昭    confused confused appearslike layity-people bright bright

I have the heart of a fool indeed – so ignorant!
Ordinary people are bright

My mind is that of a fool – how blank!
Vulgar people are clear.

I am foolish of human mind also?
Innocent conventional people are clear.

I have the heart of a fool!
Worldly people see clearly;

I am foolish of heart - so foolish!
Confused! The layity think clearly.

So confused! The layity are bright.

So confused! The layity stay clear.

So confused! Layity think clearly.


我獨昏昏          I alone muddled-faint
俗人察察          layity-people clean-spotless

I alone am muddled
Ordinary people are scrutinizing

I alone am drowsy.
Vulgar people are alert.

I alone am drowsy;
Normal people discern difference,

I alone see dimly.
Worldly people bargain;

I alone am drowsy.
The layity, alert.
I alone am inside.

I alone stay shut.

我獨悶悶          I alone shut in
澹兮其若海        tranquil appearslike it as ocean
飂兮若無所止      highwinds appearslike seems without place stop

Tranquility appears the ocean.

As tranquil as the ocean.
Limitless as the high winds.

The high winds are limitless.

With the tranquility of the ocean,
And the limitlessness of the wind.


眾人皆有以        great people each possess by
而我獨頑且鄙      and I alone obstinant and rustic
我獨異於人        I alone different at persons
而貴食母          and expensive eat mother

And the limitlessness of the wind.

The people each have their trades,
and I alone am stubborn and lowly,

I alone am different from others
I value the mother who nourishes

Because I value the nourishing 
I value the nourishing mother
I value the mother who nourishes


