
道常無名         Tao eternal without name
樸雖小           simple eventhough small
天下莫能臣也      heaven-down nothing ableto official alse

The Tao, eternally nameless
Its simplicity, although imperceptible

The way is for ever nameless.
Though the uncarved block is small

Tao normally does not reveal his name.
The being behind existence is small in origin,


17 - 28 - 40

Eternal TAO is nameless, 
Simple and small, yet
nothing in the world could subjugate it.

侯王若能守之      marquis & kingship simile ableto defend of
萬物將自賓        10k things shall visitor

Would welcome every physical thing

Would make guests of all physical things
Would make guests of every physical thing

Eternal TAO is nameless.
So simple and small yet
nothing in the world could subjugate it.

Kings and princes, if they would follow,
All physical things would become guests,

天地相合          heaven-earth eachother-harmony
以降甘露         by descend sweet dew

Heaven and Earth in harmony,
The soft rain falls sweetly.


Soft rain descends sweetly.
Soft rain will fall sweetly.



    Heaven and Earth in harmony,
    The soft rain falls sweetly.
    Sweet rain falling softly
    The soft dew falling sweetly

Heaven and Earth harmonize,
And nectar willingly rains.

The soft rain falls sweetly.
Sweet dew falls willingly
Sweet nectar falls willingly

Dew like necatar gently falls

    Soft dew comes down willingly
    Nectar descends willingly
    dew, coming down willingly
    Dew rains down willingly
    Nectar will rain willingly
    Dew raining down willingly
    And nectar willingly rains.


民莫之令而自均    people nothing of command and self uniform

    Heaven and Earth in harmony,
    Soft dew descends willingly,

    People will not need to force it, it will adjust by itself
    And the people will be equitable, though no one so decrees.
    The people, not ordered and yet self balanced.
    It would fall on everyone naturally and equally without being decreed.
    Which, without the directions of men, reaches equally everywhere as of its own accord. 

    Commanded by no one

    Soft dew descends willingly,
    Without any decree, 
    it falls evenly

    Without a person's command
    Not commanded by people,


    Commanded by no person, it itself is equitable. 


始制有名         origin system bearing-name
名亦既有         name also already-have                 //existing

bearing name

Only when it is cut are there names.
As soon as there are names

Only when restricted, are there names.
Names already exist,

The moment the universe started, hierarchy was already there.

From the origin things bear names,

Names from the start
Names already exist,

Heaven and Earth in harmony,
Soft dew descends willingly,

From the start there were names,
Names were already in existance.

夫亦將知止       man also shall beauty stop
知止可以不殆     beauty stop can by not perilous
譬道之在天下     example: tao of life heaven-down
猶川谷之於江海    still river valley of at river ocean

One should also know when to stop,
Knowing when to stop averts peril.

Tao's existence in the world is like:
Streams to valleys; rivers to oceans.