

昔之得一者       formerly of rare one being
天得一以清       heaven rare one by clean
地得一以寧       earth rare one by settled
神得一以靈       gods rare one by potency
谷得一以盈       valley rare one by fill
萬物得一以生     10k things rare-one-by produce
侯王得一以為天下貞 princes & kings rare-by-one action heaven-down hero
其致之一也       its to of one also

    Valleys become whole with life.

Those who formerly attained oneness:

    Heaven becames whole and clean.
    Earth becames whole and stable.
    Gods became whole and powerful.
    Valleys then full of abundance.
    The myriad things then whole and alive.
    Princes and kings then whole and admired by the world.

For becoming whole it follows:


天無以清將恐裂    heaven without-by clean shall-???  ???
地無以寧將恐發    earth without-by settle shall-???  ???
神無以靈將恐歇    gods without-by powerful shall-??? ???
谷無以盈將恐竭    valley without-by full shall-??? ???
萬物無以生將恐滅    10k-things without-by beget shall-??? ???
侯王無以貞而貴高將恐蹶  princes-and without by hero and expensive high shall-??? ???

    Valleys - without fullness would wither,
    Valleys - without fullness they  wither,
                                     perish
    Valleys - without fullness wither away 123,
    Valleys - without abundance wither away 12,


    Heaven - without cleanliness it would fall,
    Earth - without stability it would shatter,
    Gods - without power they would grow tired,
    Valleys - without abundance withering away,
    Myriad things - without life going extinct, 
    The princes - without admiration they fear any stumble.


故貴以賤為本         thus expensive by inexpensive action root
高以下為基           high by down action foundation
Thus the superior is rooted from the inferior,
The high require a foundation from the lowest,



是以侯王自稱孤寡不穀  thus by princes-and self fit orphans-widows not grain
此非以賤為本耶 非乎   by expensive action root really? isnt because?

Thus the princes call themselves orphans, windows, hungry.
The superior claims the root.  Really, how could they not?

So the superior claims the root. Really how couldn't they?
The superior claims the root. Really, how should they not?

Thus 




故致數輿無輿       thus tosend tocount earth without earth
不欲琭琭如玉     not desire jade jade simile jade
珞珞如        pendant pendant as

Therefore ultimate status is no status,
Not desiring shiny gems as real beauty,
Jewels are but rock.




Not desiring sparkling gem is be
Do not envy one jade among many jewels,
But among .

Do not envy one jad
e among many jewels,


Envy not one jade among many jewels,





Hence the highest renown is without renown,
Not wishing to be one among many like jade
Nor to be aloof like stone.

   therefore ultimate  status is no status
   do not desire jade  gems as real beauty
   gems are just rock

   therefore ultimate  status is no status
   wish not to be one  of many like stones
   nor an aloof jade

Therefore ultimate status is no status,
Wish not to be one of many like stones,
Nor a precious gem.


