
曲則全              yield then whole
枉則直              bend then straight
窪則盈              drain then full
敝則新              worn then new
少則得              a little benefits
多則惑              a lot perplexes

Yield and stay whole.
Bend and stand tall.
         stay straight.
Empty and stay full.
Wear out and stay new.
A little is beneficial.
         will benefit.
A whole lot perplexes.

Yield and so remain whole.
Bend while standing straight.
Empty out while staying full.
Wear out while becoming new.

Yield and so remain whole.
Bend and still stand tall.
Empty out and become full.
Wear out and be made anew.
A little bit is beneficial.
A whole lot just perplexes.

Wear out and remain new.
Become worn and remain new
Wear out and be made anew.

A little bit will benefit.
A whole lot just perplexes

Yielding and so remaining whole.
Bending and still standing tall.
Emptying out and staying filled.
Wearing out and being made anew.

A little bit has benefit.
A whole lot just perplexes.

So a little bit has beneficial.
So a little bit brings benefits,
But a whole lot? Just perplexes.
A whole lot just perplexes.

是以聖人抱一        yes by holy person embrace 1
為天下式            without heaven-down formpattern

So a holy person holds the one,

So a holy person embraces one,
setting a model for the world.


不自見故明          not self tosee so clear
不自是故彰          not self therefore so manifest
不自伐故有功        not self attack so have honor
不自矜故長          not self boast so lengthtime

Without flaunting themselves – and so are seen clearly
Without presuming themselves – and so are distinguished
Without praising themselves – and so have merit
Without boasting about themselves – and so are lasting

He does not show himself, and so is conspicuous;
He does not consider himself right, and so is illustrious;
He does not brag, and so has merit;
He does not boast, and so endures.

He does not see his self for he is honest; he does not exist for he is clear;
He does not attack himself for he has merit; he is not self important for he endures.

Unaware that he sees, He sees clearly.
Not holding himself to be right, He proves to be right.
Not seeking his own glory, He accomplishes great missions.
Not regarding himself as great, He becomes the king of all.

They do not flaunt themselves, for they are clearly seen.
They do not presume themselves, for they are proven right. ??
They do not launch attacks, for they posses honor.
They do not boast, and so they endure.

They do not flaunt; they are seen clearly.
They do not presume; they stay dilligent.
They do not seek glory; they have honor already.
They do not boast; and so they are enduring.

They do not flaunt; they are seen clearly.
They do not presume; they stay dilligent.
They do not seek glory; having honor already.
They do not boast; and so they are enduring.


    Not flaunting, but being seen clearly.
    Not presuming, but keeping dilligence.
    Not attacking, but holding fast honor.
    Not boasting, and so enduring forever.

夫唯不爭            man-only not fight                 It lives without contention,
故天下莫能與之爭    so heaven-down nothing ableto "what if..." of fighting
古之所謂曲則全者    ancient of place-calledsay yield-then-whole dudes

So called of ancient, (yield and so remaining whole) person


They live without contention,
So nothing in the world will be in contention with them.
When the ancients said "Yielding and so remaining whole"



豈虛言哉            how empty words ?!?!?
誠全而歸之          truly whole and return of

Return and become truly whole.

Were these just empty words?
Return becoming truly whole.

Would these be just empty words
Were these words just empty?

These words, were they empty?
Return, becoming whole again.