
太上 不知有之    ruler best  not knows posessing of
其次 親而譽之    its next   love and praise of
其次 畏之        its next   fear of
其次 侮之        its next   despise of      ridiculej
信不足焉         letter not excessive where
有不信焉         have not letter where
悠兮其貴言       drawnout appearslike its expensive words
功成事遂         acheivement become abstractthing thens       (success)
百姓皆謂 我自然  100 surnames all called  I self-nature


The greatest ruler  is not know to be had
The next one        is loved and praised
The next one        is feared
The next one        is mocked

The highest rulers, people do not know they have them
The next level, people love them and praise them
The next level, people fear them
The next level, people despise them

The best of all rulers is but a shadowy presence to his subjects.
Next comes the ruler they love and praise;
Next comes one they fear;
Next comes one with whom they take liberties.

With the highest and best ruler,
People do not seem to know his presence.
Next comes the ruler who is loved and praised;
Next comes the ruler who is feared;
Next comes the ruler who is despised

The greatest king  no one knows they have,
The next greatest  both loved and praised,
The next greatest  is feared,
The next greatest  is mocked.

// for bad rulers
Where trust is not sufficient
Have no trust there

If the rulers' trust is insufficient
Have no trust in them

Distrust is due to lack of faith.

Thusit was that when faith (in the Tao) was deficient (in the rulers)
a want of faith in them ensued (in the people).

People have no trust in them

Where rulers lack trust 
No one trusts them back

When rulers lack trust,
No one trusts them back.
              in return
People don't trust 

When rulers lack sufficient trust,
Have no trust for them in return.

!
When rulers lack necessary trust,
Have no trust for them in return.

The next greatest  is mocked.
When rulers are not trusting,
The people do not trust them.

Have no trust for them in return.
Do not trust them in return
Have no trust for them as well


// for good rulers
Deliberate, valuing every word
Succeeding and settling matters,
The people all say "We did it naturally".

Proceeding calmly, valuing their words
Task accomplished, matter settled
The people all say, "We did it naturally"

Tao moves freely as he wishes;
He has no need to give commands.
However, when a great work is completed,
People say the occurrence is natural.

How irresolute did those (earliest rulers) appear, showing (by
their reticence) the importance which they set upon their words! 
Their work was done and their undertakings were successful, 
while the people all said, 'We are as we are, of ourselves!' 

悠兮其貴言       drawnout appearslike its expensive words
功成事遂         acheivement become abstractthing thens       (success)
百姓皆謂 我自然  100 surnames all called  I self-nature

Patiently, deliberately, valuing every word,
When success is obtained and matters settled,
The people will all say they did it naturally.

Patient and deliberate, valuing each word,
With success obtained and matters settled,
The people will say they did it naturally.



The greatest king  no one knows they have,
The next greatest  both loved and praised,
The next greatest  is feared,
The next greatest  is mocked.

When rulers are not trusting,
The people do not trust them.

Patient and deliberate, valuing each word,
With success obtained and matters settled,
The people will say they did it naturally.