
We are re-ordering this based on the China Soul translation.
I like the flow better.


夫佳兵者 不祥之器   man good soldier ones  so-ominous of instrument
物或惡之          physicalthing either  evil of 
故有道者不處       thus have tao ones not dwell

A strong military, a tool of misfortune
All things detest it
Therefore, those who possess the Tao avoid it

It is because arms are instruments of ill omen 
and there are Things that detest them 
that the one who has the way does not abide by their use.

Arms are instruments of ill omen;
a gentleman does not use them.

Now arms, however beautiful, are instruments of evil omen, 
hateful, it may be said, to all creatures. 
Therefore they who have the Tao do not like to employ them.


Strong soldiers are  tools of misfortune,

So a powerful military
a tool of misfortune
is a tool for misfortune,
Detested by all things.  

A powerful military is a tool for misfortune.
Detested by all things 
Thus those having Tao will not dwell on them.

A powerful military is misfortune's tool,
Hated by everything
Thus those with TAO do not dwell on them.

A powerful military, misfortune's tool,
Hated by everything,
Thus those with TAO - do not dwell there.

is an ominstrument 
is an ominous tool
a tool for misfortune.
Hated by everything
Thus those having Tao will not dwell on them.



A powerful military is an ominous tool.
All things abhor it
Thus those with TAO do not dwell on it.


It is because arms are instruments of ill omen 
and there are Things that detest them 
that the one who has the way does not abide by their use.



君子居則貴左       monarch son dwell strengthen expensive left
用兵則貴右        use soldiers strength expensive right
兵者不祥之器       soldier ones not ? of instrument
非君子之器         not monarch son of instrument
不得已而用之       not rare already conj use of


At home a prince values their left hand,
But when at war values their right hand.

At home the prince values their left hand,
During war they will value their right.

During war they value their right hand.

But when at war will value their right.

When using it out of necessity
When using them 


At home, a prince favors his left hand,
During war he favors his right instead.

Soliders are instruments of misfortune,
And not the instruments of some prince.

If being compelled to make use of them,



恬淡為上          ? ? without best

勝而不美          ? and not beauty
而美之者          and beauty of ones
是樂殺人          thus happy killing person

Best show restraint

No glory in victory
Those who glorify

Victorious but without glory
Those who glorify
Are delighting in the killing
Those who delight in killing

Win without glory,
Those who glorify,
Are happy to kill.





夫樂殺人者         man happy kill person ones
則不可得志於天下矣  strength not can rare ambition at heaven-down  ?

Those who delight in killing
Cannot achieve their ambitions upon the world

One who exults in the killing of men will never have his way in the empire.
He who takes pleasure in killing people will not succeed as a ruler.

    Win without glory,
    Those who glorify,
    Are happy to kill.

Men who happily kill,
Will not acheive their ambitions in thw world

Those who delight in killing, 


One who happily kills,
Will not obtain their wordly ambitions.



吉事尚左          ? affairs proclaim left
凶事尚右          vicious affairs proclaim right     // or "famished"


Bountiful things from the left,
Vicious 

Preservation from the left,
Vicious ruin from the right.


In times of rejoicing the left is favored
In times of mourning the right is favored


偏將軍居左        ? shall army dwell left
上將軍居右        best shall army dwell right

The lieutenant general is positioned to the left
The major general is positioned to the right

A lieutenants place is on the left;
The general’s place is on the right.

Lieutenants stand on the left;
Generals stands to the right.
The general is on the right.

The officers' place is on the left,
The general's place is on the right.

The officers stand on the left,
The general stands to the right

The officers belong is left,
The general's in on the right.

And the general belongs on the right.

The officers belong on the left,
The general's place is the right.

The officers belong on the left,

Lieutenants belong on the left,
A general belongs on the right.


言以喪禮處之      words so ?-?-at of
殺人之眾         killing person of great
以悲哀泣之       so ? ? ? of
戰勝以喪禮處之    ? ? so ?-?-at of

We say that they are treated as if in a funeral
Those who have been killed
Should be mourned with sadness
Victory in war should be treated as a funera

The way they stand means to treat a war like a funeral.
After killing many, one should weep in mourning;
After winning a war, one should observe the rites of mourning.

This means performing funeral rights 
Those who have been killed
Should be mourned with sadness
Victory in war should feel like a funeral

A general belongs on the right.

They form the funeral party.
After killing many,
One should mourn and weep.


When rejoicing favor the left,
When mourning favor the right.

Officers standing on the left,
A general stands on the right.

They stand as if at a funeral,
So much killing,
So much mourning for the dead,
The funeral of victory in war.

So much mourning for the dead,
So much mourning and weeping,

They stand as if at a funeral.
So much killing,
Then the mourning and weeping.
Victories in war are funerals.



