以道佐人主者     so Tao assistant person master involvedin
不以兵強天下     not by soldiers strengthen heaven-down

The one who uses the Tao to advise the ruler
Does not dominate the world with soldiers

One who assists the ruler of men by means of the way 
does not intimidate the empire by a show of arms.

In using the way to assist in managing people,
Avoid strong arming anything under heaven.

He who follows Tao in exercising Tao’s sovereignty
will not rule the world with an army.

He who would assist a lord of men in harmony with the Tao will
not assert his mastery in the kingdom by force of arms.

So the Taoist minister tells the ruler,
Do not thicken the world with soldiers.


其事好還         its abstractthing good payback
師之所處         troops of place dwell
荊棘生焉         thistles-thorns beget here
大軍之後         great army of behind
必有凶年         certainly have famine-year

Such affairs tend to backfire.

Where the troops are encamped,
Thistles and thorns take root,
And following each great army,
Is certainly a year of famine.

The encampment of the soldiers
Where soldiers have encamped
The encampment of the 


善有果而已       good have result and already
不敢以取強       not dare by take force

A good commander achieves result, then stops
And does not dare to reach for domination

One who is good aims only at bringing his campaign to a conclusion 
and dare not thereby intimidate.

Those most adept have results, yet stop, 
not daring not to seek better.

A skilful (commander) strikes a decisive blow, and stops. 
He does not dare (by continuing his operations) to assert and complete his mastery.

The good acheive their goal then stop.
They do not dare reach for domination.

Good commanders reach their goal then stop

A good general acheives their goal and stops.
They do not dare desire continued domination.

果而勿矜         result and do+not boast
果而勿伐         result and do+not slay
果而勿驕         result and do+not arrogance
果而不得已       result and not-obtain-already     act-against-will
果而勿強         result and do+not 

Achieves then does not boast,
Achieves then does not gloat,
Achieves without being proud,
Achieves only when there is no other way,
Achieves without domination.

Strikes and does not boast,
Strikes and does not gloat,
Strikes not from arrogance,
Strikes only when there is no other way,
Strikes without domination.


物壯則老         physicalthings strengthen contrast old
是謂不道         yes called not Tao
不道早已         not Tao morning already

Things grow strong, then age,
This is called the "not TAO",
The "Not TAO" passes quickly.

This is contrary to the TAO,
What is contrary ends soon.


