
致虛極           to empty's extreme
守靜篤           defend quiet earnest

萬物並作         10k things juxtaposed do
吾以觀復         I bymeans gaze complex


In ultimate emptiness; 
stay quiet and earnest.


Keep to quite

Ultimate emptiness,
Extremely empty,

Utlimate emptiness,
hold to serenity
hold to tranquility
maintains serenity


At ultimate emptiness,
hold fast tranquility.

All things rise together,
I watch for their return.

Manifold creatures - each returns to its root.

夫物芸芸 各復歸其根   man thing soso-many   every comes-back its root

Manifold creatures - each returns to its root.

歸根曰靜         return root call tranquility
是謂復命         so called return life
復命曰常         return life call eternal
知常曰明         knows eternal call bright

Returning to the root is called tranquility
Tranquility is called returning to one's nature
Returning to one's nature is called constancy
Knowing constancy is called clarity

Returning to one’s roots is known as stillness.
This is what is meant by returning to one’s destiny.
Returning to one’s destiny is known as the constant.
Knowledge of the constant is known as discernment.

Such a return is called tranquility;
Such tranquility is called return to life;
Such a return is eternity. 
To know eternity is enlightenment

Manifold creatures - each returns to its root.

Returning to the root we call tranquility,
Tranquility is called restoration of life,
Restoration of life we call eternal flame,
Knowing the eternal flame we call clarity.

不知常 妄作凶    not knowing eternal  delusion towrite vicious
知常容           knowing eternal appearance
容乃公           appearance thus publicgood
公乃王           publicgood thus kingship
王乃天           kingship thus heaven
天乃道           heaven thus TAO
道乃久           TAO thus ancient
沒身不殆         havenot moralityconduct notso perilious


Ignorance of eternity causes vicious chaos.

Knowing eternity is acceptance,
Accepting all that comes is impartial,
Staying impartial is good kingship,
Good kingship is thus heaven,
Heaven is thus TAO,
TAO is thus eternal.
The self's morality is free from peril.


Ignorant of eternity - action leads to peril.

To know eternity is have acceptance,
Accepting whatever comes is impartial.
Staying impartial is then good kingship.
Good kingship is heaven:
Heaven is thus TAO - TAO is thus eternal.

The self is free from peril.


To know eternity is to accept what comes,
To accept whatever comes is impartiality,
As staying impartial makes good kingship,
And good kingship is heavenly,
Heaven is thus TAO & TAO is thus eternal.
The self stays without danger.


And the self safe from danger.

The self safe from danger.


The self stays safe from .
On this path the self free from danger



        At ultimate emptiness,
        hold fast tranquility.

       All things rise together,
       I watch for their return.

Myriad creatures each returns to its root.
Returning to the root we call tranquility,
Tranquility is called restoration of life,
Restoration of life we call eternal flame,
Knowing the eternal flame we call clarity.

To know eternity is to accept what comes,
To accept whatever comes is impartiality,
As staying impartial makes good kingship,
     And good kingship is heavenly.

Heaven is thus TAO - TAO is thus eternal.
     The self stays without danger.
