c1:

道可道﹐非常道
名可名﹐非常名
無名天地之始
有名萬物之母
故常無欲﹐以觀其妙
﹐常有欲﹐以觀其徼
此兩者﹐同出而異名     
同謂之玄           
玄之又玄﹐眾妙之門      


c1:

A tao-able tao is not the eternal Tao.
A name-able name, not the eternal Name.

The Origin of heaven and earth is without name.
The Birthgiver of everything is bearing a name.

Thus eternally without desire - gaze upon its source,
     eternally bearing desire - gaze upon its effect.

These two faces, of one essence and two names,
A mystery of oneness.
Mystery of mysteries, door to wonder's source.


道可道  非常道          A tao-able tao: not the eternal Tao,
名可名  非常名          a name-able name: not the eternal Name.
無名天地之始            Without name is the origin of heaven & earth,
有名萬物之母            bearing name is the mother of myriad things.

故常無欲  以觀其妙      Thus, eternally without desire: gaze upon its (essence/core/wonder),
  常有欲  以觀其徼      eternally bearing desire: gaze upon its embeddings.

此兩者   同出而異名     These two faces - of one essence but different names.
同謂之玄                   The mystery of oneness.
玄之又玄 眾妙之門       Mystery of mysteries, door to great (wonder).


===
Tao can Tao, not eternal Tao.
Name can Name, not eternal Name.

The worded word, is not the Word.   * Spoken, or 
The named name, is not the Name.

(The words) (that can) (be spoken), (are not) (the eternal) (Word).
(The names) (that can) (be named), (are not) (the eternal) (Name).

Words are not the WORD.
Names are not the NAME.

There is a WORD which cannot be spoken.
There is a NAME which cannot be named.

Tao-able tao? Not the eternal Tao.
Name-able name? Not the eternal Name.

A tao-able tao; not the eternal Tao.    
A name-able name; not the eternal Name.

---
The tao that can be spoken, is not the eternal Tao. 
The name that can be named,  is not the eternal Name.

The Tao that can be trodden is not the enduring and unchanging Tao. 
The name that can be named is not the enduring and unchanging name. 

Tao can be spoken of, but is not the Tao of whom we commonly speak;
A name can be given, but not a common name. 

---
For you are our God: indescribeable, incomprehensible, ever existing, and eternally the same.

Tao that can be spoken of is not an eternal Tao.

A path you can literally walk down, is not the Way.
Words you can speak, are not the Word.

===


無名天地之始
有名萬物之母

===
(null) (name) (heaven) (earth) (of) (beginning)
(some) (name) (every -- thing) (of) (mother)

Without name is the creator of heaven and earth.
Bearing name is the mother of all things.

heaven & earth       heaven and earth    heaven and earth      heaven and earth
all the things       so many things      ten thousand things   every good thing

The Creator of heaven and earth is nameless.
The Birthgiver of everything is with name.

The Origin of heaven and earth is without name.
The Birthgiver of everything is bearing a name.

Without name is the origin of heaven and earth.
Bearing name is the mother of every good thing.


Without name is heaven & earth's origin.
Bearing name is everything's birthgiver.

Without name is heaven and earth's originator.
Bearing name is the mother of physical things.

Bearing name is the mother of all created things.
Bearing name is the mother of all that there is.
Bearing name is the mother of all that there is.

Without name is the origin of heaven and earth.    (& -2)
Bearing name is the mother of all that there is

heaven & earth      (14)  -2
heaven and earth    (16)  0
heaven and of earth (19)  +3

is 16 characters 
1234567890123456
physical things    (-1)
all that there is  (+1)
myriad things      (-3)
all of the things  (+1)
every good thing   (0)     <- bad translation though

1234567890123456
10 thousand things (+2)
all of creation    (-1)
all created things (+2)
every created thing (+3)


Without name is the origin of heaven and of earth.
Bearing name is the mother of all physical things.


---
The nameless is the origin of Heaven and Earth
The named is the mother of myriad things

(Conceived of as) having no name, it is the Originator of heaven and earth; 
(conceived of as) having a name, it is the Mother of all things. 

He can be called non-being, because he preceded Heaven and earth;
He can be called pre-being, because he gave birth to all that is.

===

故常無欲  以觀其妙     
   常有欲  以觀其徼

===
therefore - eternal - none - desires     by - watch - it - wonderful
                eternal - some - desires     by - watch - it - (boundary / fringe / manifestation)

Therefore, eternally without desire -- observing 
               bearing eternal desire, 

Thus

one observes its wonder   / one observes

Thus, always without desire -- gaze upon its essence,
        always bearing desire -- gaze upon its embeddings.

---
Thus, constantly without desire, one observes its essence
Constantly with desire, one observes its manifestations

Always without desire we must be found,  if its deep mystery we would sound; 
But if desire always within us be, its outer fringe is all that we shall see. 

Therefore, since he is non-being, his wonders can be meditated upon;
Since he is being, his track can be seen

===

此兩者   同出而異名

===
(this) (two) (persons)    (oneness)(arise/issue/put forth)(and)(different)(names)

(different names) = synonyms

note: "two" "兩" is like "both" or "pair" rather than numeral 2 "二"

These two persons: of one essence and different names.
These two persons: of one essence with two names.

These two terms: one source with two names.

These twin persons - arise together with different names.
These twin persons - same essence and different names.

Both these peple - the same essence and different names.

These two faces, of one essence and two names,

Both of these - arising in unity and named differently
---
These two emerge together but differ in name.

Under these two aspects, it is really the same; but as development takes place, it receives the different names.

Non-being and being are merely two terms for the one source.
===

同謂之玄
玄之又玄 眾妙之門

===
(same)(function/predicate)(of)(dark and mysterious)
(mystery)(of)(again)(mystery)    (great)(wonder/essence)(of)(doors)

of mystery
function of sameness
a mystery of being the same

The mystery of unity,        

The mystery of oneness,
mystery of mysteries, door to great wonder.


---
The unity is said to be the mystery
Mystery of mysteries, the door to all wonders

Together we call them the Mystery.
Where the Mystery is the deepest is the gate of all that is subtle and wonderful. 

That the two are one is a mystery.
Mystery upon mystery—the gateway to all wonders

===

These two faces, of one essence and two names,
a mystery of oneness,
mystery of mysteries, door to wonder's source.

Both of these - arising in unity yet differing in name.
The mystery of unity,
Mystery of mysteries, gateway to the source of great wonder.

These two faces, one essence yet differing in name,
a mystery of oneness,
mystery of mysteries, door to the source of wonder.

Both these persons, same essence yet differing in name,
a mystery of oneness,
mystery of mysteries, gateway to the source of wonder.

Both of these - same in essence yet differing in name.
A mystery of oneness.
Mystery of mysteries, gateway to the source of wonder.

Both these persons, of one essence yet differing in name.
A mystery of oneness.
Mystery of mysteries, door to the source of great wonder.

Both these persons, of one essence yet differing in name,
Mystery of being one,
Mystery of mysteries, door to the source of great wonder.
                                            every secret

source: refer to line above "behold the source" / essence / core
The "unity" or "oneness" needs to mirror line 1 and line 2.
Line 2 needs be same length as "mystery of mysterie"
Line 1 and 3 need to be same length.
Shouldn't use numerals in line 1 (like "one" and "two").


door to wonder's source

24 base
(+3) door -> gateway  
(+6) -> great 
(+5) wonder's source -> the source of wonder
(+5) wonder's source -> the wonderful source


 5 unity
 6 as one  
 6 unison
 7 oneness
 8 sameness
 8 together
12 togetherness

   / [5, 7, 9]
